---
title: Is the IPCC Too Political?
layout: default
nav_order: 1
---
The website “Global Climate Change Facts: The Truth, The Consensus, and the Skeptics” written by Dr. John T. Everett makes a number of criticisms towards what is referred to as 
“the climate consensus” (Everett, 2020).

The purpose of the source is to persuade or advocate for a climate skeptic viewpoint to a general audience. The author is Dr. John T. Everett, who does possess somewhat relevant 
degrees (engineering and business), worked for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for several decades, and has contributed to some work of the IPCC 
(Everett, 2011). However, there have been several sources debunking some of Everett’s claims, especially surrounding his conclusions drawn from NOAA data which calls his 
credibility into question (Various Contributors, 2018). He does provide links to some of his sources although many of them are dead links, making it difficult to verify information, and most of them are not scientific studies. The website was last updated September 2020, so it does reflect current criticism. Throughout there is a bias towards climate skeptic
ism. For instance, there are several criticisms towards the IPCC from skeptics whereas only a few criticisms are pointed out for the skeptic side, and each is followed up by a 
counterargument.

The claim in question is that the IPCC process for creating the Summary for Policy Makers (SPM) is too political (Everett, 2020). Everett (2020) argues that although the underlying
report is not flawed, the SPM allows governments with personal interests to influence the language and even what data is included. Since climate change is a pressing concern and of
global importance, it is not hard to see why many groups find high stakes in the public message about climate change. Everett has had several other claims debunked, mostly relating
to incorrect data interpretation; it would be incorrect to conclude all his claims false due to previous errors. Additionally, he has contributed to the IPCC in the past so may be 
more intimately familiar with the process (Everett, 2011). For these reasons, I was intrigued by this claim.

The IPCC was created by the World Meteorological Organization and the United Nations Environment Programme with the goal of summarizing climate change causes, impacts, risks, and 
recommended adaptation and mitigation (IPCC, 2020). The IPCC has 195 member countries and scientists from around the world contribute to it. The IPCC produces reports from the 
three Working Groups, along with a Summary and the SPM. 

The SPM goes through a different review process than the other reports because of its explicit purpose for a lay audience, and not the scientific community. Member governments go 
through the document line by line to ensure agreement. This is done in consultant with the scientists who drafted the report, and is then approved by the Working Groups, as well as
the IPCC Panel although the Panel cannot make changes (IPCC, 2020). The stated goal of this process is to ensure an SPM is both clear for policymakers and scientifically sound.
Review comments are kept for at least five years. Unfortunately, the comments referenced by Everett are from the 2007 report, so I was unable to find official references. However,
the first issue was in changing the word “evident” to “unequivocal” when describing the warming of the planet (Everett, 2020). This was approved in order to increase the clarity of
the report. The other proposed change apparently was to remove a section of data which represented a colder period, as it was often cited by climate skeptics. This proposed change 
was not passed. Although I can appreciate the concern for maintaining an objective report, this more biased suggestion was not passed. The IPCC, though created by and contributed 
to by governments around the world has strong measures in place to ensure the documents it produces are not easily swayed by one singular opinion or interest and has several checks
and balances in place to remain objective.

**Reference**

Everett, J.T., 2020. What are the views of the IPCC Process by the Skeptics? [WWW Document]. Global Climate Change Facts. URL http://www.climatechangefacts.info/ (accessed 2.14.21).

Everett, J.T., 2011. John Everett [WWW Document]. URL http://www.oceanassoc.com/Bio_Dr_John_T_Everett_Resume_All/ (accessed 2.14.21).

IPCC, 2020. About the IPCC. URL https://www.ipcc.ch/about/ (accessed 2.14.21).

Various Contributors, 2018. John Everett [WWW Document]. RationalWiki. URL https://rationalwiki.org/w/index.php?title=John_Everett&action=info


